well the conflict in Israel and Gaza is
far from simple and many people are
searching the internet with their
questions here with me to help answer
some of them the most trending questions
at least that people are asking online
search engines is our Middle East
analyst Sebastian Asher Sebastian
welcome to you thanks very much for
being with us um for your expertise
before we go to those questions yes
let's get some analysis on where we're
at at this situation we've be talking a
lot about the Raffa Crossing if you can
explain what that is why it's so
important and if it is likely that
Israel will allow people out yeah I I
mean to a degree we're in a sort of
holding pattern here I mean the big
story of course is when and if Israel
will launch it's offensive from the
north down in the south at the Rafa
Crossing which is the one of the two
Crossings there's one obviously into
Israel this one is into Egypt is where
the anticipation is at the moment and
this morning we had reports that there
was going to be a temporary truce to
allow a very we're talking very small
number of Palestinian Americans
across um into Egypt so as you were
saying in your introduction that there
are several thousand people so at the
rro Crossing waiting to go but the
temporary truth has not been agreed
we've actually had a statement from uh
the Israeli Prime Minister's office
saying that there is no ceasefire and
when we talking about ceasefire we're
only talking about this most limited
truce in terms of down there there's
been no ceasefire no sign of a ceasefire
up in the north of Gaza where the
Israeli bombardment has continued how
has still continued to fire some Rockets
into Israel so the the the the war
between Israel and Hamas hasn't really
change in any of its Dimensions over the
past two or 3 days the efforts are of
course growing to try and open up Rafa
crossing the Hope being that once it's
open obviously the first aid can come in
the first people can come out and once
that has happened it's a major first
step towards allowing more people out
allowing the the the the hundreds of
thousands of God ains who come down from
the north of Gaza where Israel is
expected to have its offensive after
Israel warned them that they must go
obviously they're in very difficult
circumstances down in the South still
the blockade which has been tightened by
Israel is is in place there's been a
tiny easing of it but food shortages
water shortages electricity Etc where
did they stay all the shelters
essentially are taken up people staying
in relatives homes so it's it's it's a
very combust situation down there Egypt
uh which controls veraa Crossing does
not want a huge influx of Palestinians
one for its own security two it doesn't
want to be seen doing what would be seen
in the Arab world the Muslim world as
Israel's bidding the fear the concern
amongst many Arabs is that once the
Palestinians have left they may never go
back and Egypt does not want to
facilitate that okay so let's talk about
um the situation to in the northern
Israel and its border with Lebanon and
this group Hezbollah who have been
firing Rockets into Northern Israel
killed two people in the past day or so
to Israelis just explain who Hezbollah
are the influence they have the the
control that they have in Lebanon and
what they want to achieve well
understand that leban at the moment
isn't governed by anybody there's a
caretaker government there's no
president now part of the reason is the
division between certain political
elements and hasbullah hasbullah there's
no doubt is the most powerful political
military force in Lebanon it's more
powerful than the Lebanese Army um it
led a successful in hasbullah terms bid
for many years to drive Israel out of a
buffer zone that had established in the
south of Lebanon Israel finally withdrew
in 200000 and hasbullah saw that as a
huge success for themselves and they
essentially presented themselves as the
only force in the Arab world that
actually had won at least one Victory
against Israel six years later there was
um a a a a a a a problem between Israel
and and uh and Lebanon which led Israel
to invade Lebanon it essentially paliz
the south of Lebanon which is pretty
much under the control of Hezbollah and
hasbullah at that time was in dodgy
territory ear in Lebanon because many
people blamed hasbullah for calling that
Devastation on Lebanon by Israel by its
actions so hasbullah tries to have this
balance between its role as what it sees
as key resistance against Israel but
also within Lebanon of not pushing so
hard against Israel that it upsets the
whole status quo in Lebanon such as it
is um and for example I mean unlike
Hamas which is an islamist organization
obviously and wants the islamist
ideology to be imposed wherever it rules
hasbullah has never said that in Lebanon
that and it's never 100% wanted to be
politically in control of Lebanon there
the they uh they have Ministries
they have huge clout about who's elected
president who's elected prime minister
but they don't want to 100% carry the
can for Lebanon so it's it it's a very
very difficult situation A precarious
balance for Lebanon for for for
Hezbollah within Lebanon and its
relations outside and of course the
other side of Hezbollah is that it's
backed and essentially the creation to a
l extent of Iran so when people worry
when the Americans worry Anthony blinkin
at the moment has just arrived back in
Israel he was doing shuttle diplomacy
around the Arab world key issue he's
trying to lock down is that there's no
further spillover in this war obviously
every everybody looks North to hasbullah
hasbullah won't take Serious action
beyond what it's done so far without the
say so of Iran Iran has been
rhetorically suggesting that all bets
could be off if things go really bad in
Gaza but at the moment it's tether has
Bull's power and Israel has has made it
clear it does not want a war with
Hezbollah and we've seen the us moving
um air pane carriers big warships which
is essentially a warning to other
outside players who might want to get
involved less about Hamas and the battle
in Gaza but essentially a message to
Iran really that do not cross this line
we will take it very very seriously a
few moments ago you were talking about
Egypt about the raff of Crossing about
what Israel what Egypt wants or or
doesn't want people are also asking um
is it safe to travel to Egypt at the
moment I think you could say it's safe
to travel to Egypt I mean none of the
Arab states around uh um Gaza and Israel
are likely to get actively involved in a
war Lebanon may be drawn into it by
Hezbollah as as as we've just been
saying but Egypt has had the longest
peace treaty back to 1978 with Israel uh
it has in conjunction with Israel it is
very much control the borders around uh
Gaza and with Hamas it's tried to play a
mediating role it's tried to bring the
two factions the two main Palestinian
factions Hamas and fata in the occupied
West Bank together at various points
it's continued with that mission it will
and has been involved in mediation now
to try to get a ceasefire to try to get
talks going of some kind but at this
stage I think that's really too early to
Bear any througho you will have as
you'll see across the Arab world across
the Muslim World major protests in
support of the Palestinians to some
extent in boort of Hamas so if you were
going to K if you were going
to some areas where those protests are
going to be very large then you know
people traveling would need to be
careful of that there'd be security
reasons to to to have a concern of that
but in terms of Egypt directly being
involved in a war with Israel over this
that isn't going to happen and what
about Jordan people are asking is it
safe to travel to Jordan just explain
Jordan another neighboring country to
Israel previously enemies but we've seen
the uh Jordanian King also involved in
trying to negotiate some kind of it's a
very similar story I mean both both
Egypt and Jordan I mean Jordan signed a
peace deal in 1994 with uh um Israel
having participated in at least two Wars
against Israel 1967 and Myon kipur War
but its role is in some ways more
complicated than Egypt in that Egypt
returned the sin have the sin returned
to it from from from Israel it doesn't
have a large proportion of Palestinians
there either as refugees or anything
else Jordan essentially it's very
difficult to to gauge exactly the
numbers but it still has a huge
Palestinian refugee population and has a
large Palestinian population beyond that
who sort of identifies Palestinians as
much as jordanians so it's a real Tinder
books there which um King Abdullah his
father King Hussein have strugg
struggled you know throughout their
Reigns to control because anywhere I
mean if if you look outside uh the
Palestinian territories the place where
there's the strongest prop Palestinian
feeling and the strongest numbers of
people is in Jordan so King Abdullah is
playing again the same role that his
father did and as is happened with Egypt
a mediation role because of its
relationship with Israel because of the
stakes being so high for Jordan and it's
always been seen in the west as a very
West Friendly country and it depends
hugely on Western financial support in
order to survive so again it will play
as this story continues an important
mediation role but it would also be
trying very hard to keep a lid on
protests within its own country not just
palestin but also islamist it it has a
very very strong um islamist uh forer uh
politically and that has seen big
protests in the past it's seen violence
that could break out out as this
continues if the Gs are offensive goes
um goes ahead uh uh uh and there are
many many more casualties amongst
Palestinians than we've seen so far than
the pressure inside Jordan from the
people just as we'll see around the Arab
world will grow more and more intense
obviously we've talked a lot about Hamas
who they are over the past week Israel
is at war with Hamas they have vowed to
crush them to wipe them out it was Hamas
that launched this murderous attack on
Israel in which 1,400 Israelis and other
foreign Nationals were killed just over
a week ago they've taken 199 people
hostage explain a little bit more about
the Hamas leadership because we've heard
over the past few days Israel said they
have killed the leader of Hamas in Gaza
um but there is a differentiation
between the Hamas militant Wing the
Hamas political Wing let's talk about
first of all about the military wing and
who they want to destroy yes I mean they
haven't killed the actual leader of of
of Hamas they've killed some senior uh
uh members who they say were directly
involved in the uh assault uh on Israel
so you have a you have a leadership
outside a political leadership in Exile
essentially um Ismael hania is is uh is
the leader he moves between uh Qatar and
several other countries Qatar though is
his real host country and they have
shown more Readiness as you'd expect
from a political leadership to have
negotiation have talks to some degree to
move a little bit away from a founding
charge of Hamas which says that it is uh
uh working towards the total Destruction
of Israel it's blown hot and cold but
there have been times when that
leadership has essentially said that it
would settle if the 1967 borders were
returned to and the occupied palestini
territories were given to the
Palestinians as a formal state that they
would accept a truce perhaps a 100-year
truce now that kind of conversation has
died away over the past few years just
as the peace process has been stalled so
you have that element which is you know
as in any organization like this there
are different layers different strata
within it and then you have in Gaza
essentially a military leadership which
is much much more hardore you have
Muhammad de is the leader there Yahya
Sina is the political leader in Gaza the
administrative leader and these are
people who have shown no sign of any
quarter with Israel and still believe
that military solution is the only way
to go they still believe that they can
as as they obviously try to do uh in
this assault to cause so much pain so
much hurt to Israel that Israel will
either bow and leave and that's a
greatest hope or will be pressured
into compromise is probably not the
right word but in giving the
Palestinians more than I think anybody
else is expecting the the the the
political leadership the fataa
leadership
Etc they will at the moment feel that
they've made their point I mean as you
say Israel has vowed the total
obliteration of Hamas but they at the
moment are definitely in the lead they
only are in the ascendant they have the
upper hand as far as Hamas is concerned
um they will be you know giving a sense
but what they've done has changed the
status quo that's existed all these
years nothing else has done that
through their actions now they will
claim this is what they tried to say
they haven't killed any civilians they
essentially believe that anyone in
Israel is a settler and is therefore
guilty that's their way of looking at it
again the Hamas leadership itself
political leadership doesn't talk in
such black and white terms so we are
talking about very different um um
layers within Hamas which are definitely
not at odds with um at the moment but we
we could see as this progresses more
more of a division and at the end of
this process at the end of the war I
think the Hamas political leadership
just as a political leadership in the
occupi Westbank will try to reassert
themselves in terms of looking towards a
future and looking back to a two-state
solution Hamas is a prescribed terrorist
organization in the UK in the US the EU
also so many countries around the world
when we talk about the militant wing and
the political side of it is that one and
the same thing well I mean in the UK
originally the the the the armed Wing
was prescribed as terrorist and then two
years ago Hamas itself as an
organization as a whole was prescribed
as terrorist I think at the moment and
certainly in the US estimation it
doesn't make any distinction but if
there are going to be negotiations if
there are going to be talks Hamas to
some degree will have to be involved
because the Hamas political leader
leadership is unlikely to be destroyed
unless Israel is going to go on a
mission we don't know this yet but to
kill Ismael hania to kill the people who
who who who could speak for Hamas
outside of the Gaza Strip so it is a
difficult position to be in to some
degree because there's no doubt that as
far as Palestinians are concerned right
now they see Hamas as the only viable
leadership in the occupied territories
as far as f is concerned as far as Pres
Abbas is is concerned they're not seen
as having any real say even in the
occupied West Bank we're seeing there
new groups New armed groups have been
emerging in the past year and a half as
Israel has gone in on Military raids you
know almost daily there have been
clashes um in response to you know a
whole wave of killings inside Israel by
um Palestinian gunmen we've seen these
new groups arise and they and Hamas are
the ones at the moment who will be
calling the shots we've heard from
president abas he was speaking just just
yesterday saying that Hamas doesn't
represent the Palestinian people he will
hold to that but at the moment that
voice is drowned out okay let's talk
about the Palestinian people the
Palestinian people live in Gaza and the
West Bank and people are asking is
Palestine a country was Palestine ever a
country it's not formally a country at
the moment there are some countries
around the world you recognize it as a
St but it's not been formly recognized
by the UN it has a non-member Observer
status at the UN it's had since
2012 uh we talk about President Abbas so
I mean that gives a sense of a head of a
state but it's still very much in embryo
and the whole issue of a peace process
was to was to set up a viable
Palestinian state that doesn't exist the
difficulty over that was a Palestinian
never believe that what they were being
offered was anything close to what they
had lost so at the times when it looked
close that some Accord might be made
back in the early 2000s back in uh the
late 1990s the Palestinians in the end
rejected uh what they were offered
because they believe that it just didn't
didn't come near to the boundaries of
what they believed they should be given
it wasn't that the fata and uh uh and
the PLO rejected the idea of a two-state
solution wasn't that they rejected the
idea that Israel should exist but they
weren't satisfied with what uh with what
they were being offered Palestine as a
state I mean it um as an entity in the
Middle East it's existed for a very very
long time but it's existed under a whole
series of Empires under the Roman empire
under the Ottoman Empire from the 16th
century until the first world war then
it was a mandate under uh Britain up
until 1947 when Britain withdrew and
then of course there was the League of
Nations decision to divide what was
Palestine into Israel and into uh an
Arab State Israel declared independence
and then there was a war with Arab
states trying to take over the whole
area they
lost so there hasn't been a Palestine as
a country in modern times but as a name
absolutely and so the Palestinian people
100% believe that they have every right
to self-identify as Palestinians and why
did Jewish people claim it as their
Homeland well that
is based
partly on ancient history on the
Bible uh that that was their Homeland
going back you know to to the to the
days of King David Etc um it had
different states as uh uh uh uh that
existed over various times within the
framework of a
Bible but in modern history there hasn't
hasn't been an Israeli State what we're
seeing is there was a rise of Zionism in
the 19th century it was a movement in
Europe which essentially was uh pushing
for a safe Homeland for for for the
Jewish people and Israel as being their
original ancestral Homeland was where
they decided to go so the settlements
began from then and built and built and
built so more and more Jewish people
obviously were going during the next 60
70 years even before the creation of
Israel so
I mean you have slightly separate way of
looking at it you have many of the
settlers believe in the biblical sense
of Israel that all of it belongs to them
that everyone else is an intruder that
the Palestinians came after them that
they are the true indigenous population
then you have many people who came from
uh Eastern Europe uh who came after the
Holocaust who see it maybe in a slightly
more pragmatic way they see it as their
safe home that was created for them yes
it has the ancest side to it that
they're not as committed to the idea
that Judea Samaria the places in the
West Bank where the settlers are has to
be part of their Homeland what they're
more interested in is having an Israeli
State and therefore they're willing to
accept a Palestinian State side by side
if they can be assured of their own
security with that so there is that
Division I think between uh Israelis
settlers and also Jewish people the
diaspora so we have another question
which is why are Israel and Gaza at War
would you describe Israel being at war
with Gaza or being at war with Hamas
it's being described as at war with
Hamas that's how Israel describes it
that's how we're describing it
essentially because I mean I mean Hamas
controls Gaza no doubt about that there
was an election but it goes way back to
2006 but they won they then seized the
whole of Gaza by force from fata they
force them out in
2007 so there hasn't really been any way
of gauging how much the people people of
Gaza want Hamas to be in control so
Israel certainly doesn't want to look as
if they are Waging War on the
Palestinians of Gaza they want to
confine it to Hamas and that's why
Israel is saying that they're doing
everything they can to try and protect
Palestinians by telling them to leave so
they can then have a clear run at Hamas
for Palestinians they see it and many
people in across the Arab and Muslim
world and and Beyond see it as almost a
niche distinction that the bombs that
are falling from Israel the air strikes
that are happening don't make a clear
enough distinction between Hamas and
between the people who live there so
they see it as a war on Gaza as a war on
the people of Gaza as we've seen time
and time again they would say that this
is a war on Gaza and a war on the
Palestinians and a war on their desire
for a statehood their desire for dignity
why Israel why is Israel imposing this
blockade water food Medical supplies
we've just had a a update on the Reuters
news agency concerning the resumption
that Israel said was going to happen of
water in southern Gaza uh the Hamas
interior Ministry have said that that
has not happened um it said that
residents drinking unhealthy water
posing a serious health crisis
threatening the lives of the citizens
and of course many people can't get hold
of any water at the moment but why is
Israel imposing this blockade on on all
of the people the 2 million people of
Gaza well this has been a blockade to
degree that's been on Gaza since since
2007 and Egypt as well has imposed a
sort of blockade by controlling the the
entry and exit from uh the Rafa Crossing
and that's essentially a blockade on
Hamas Hamas which Israel see sees as its
biggest enemy that Egypt also sees as a
kind of enemy within the
Palestinians so what we've saw when
Israel responded to the Hamas assault
was they tightened it they then called
it a total Siege and several ministers
said that we are going to stop food
we're going to stop water we're going to
stop electricity and the thinking behind
that one imagined is to put maximum
pressure on the people of Gaza on the
pal um to to to try and disengage them
to some extent from Hamas to show these
are the consequences of what Hamas has
done you are suffering them they've done
something without necessarily your say
so they haven't gone and and and asked
you if you want this but they've done it
in your name so I think from the Israeli
perspective if they feel that if they
put maximum pressure then perhaps they
can complete their task which they've
set out to be to eradicate Hamas as
quickly as possible From anational
perspective from an aid perspective
we've heard day in day out from un Aid
agencies the other agencies that this is
just insupportable that in already very
very difficult conditions inside Gaza
have been made totally unlivable that
people will soon perhaps die uh because
of having to drink dirty water disease
all of these issues and how can you get
a large proportion of people to move
from the north of Gaza the hundreds of
thousands who've moved to a place where
there isn't much else provided there
either how can that continue and if this
is going to be a war which could go on
for months
then quite apart from what will happen
with the Israeli offensive the ground
offensive the likely loss of civilian
lives what about the people who are
actually to some extent to some extent
sheltered from that main offensive how
are they going to be uh uh uh looked
after and if a Rafa Crossing is not open
fully to allow eight I mean there are
hundreds and hundreds of lorries and
trucks containers waiting to move in
with aid but they can't they can't go in
at the moment so as I say from Israeli
perspective it's maximum pressure we
are I mean they're saying this is a war
like no other that we thought with Hamas
this is a war essentially of extinction
of obliteration the Palestinians are the
ones who are going to suffer thank you
very much for taking us through all that
in such great detail